[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Depression is the
number one topic searched
for on DoctorYourself.com.
That's the biggest concern,
as far as I can tell,
from my readers at least.
I hope after
reading the website,
they'll be a lot more cheerful.
I think depression is
primarily nutrient deficiency.
For people that are really
sick, psychotic, schizophrenic,
it could be a
nutrient dependency.
We know from history
that there was
a time when people were
eating a lot of corn
in the southern United
States, and corn
is very low in tryptophan.
Tryptophan's converted
in the body to niacin.
And because they
ate a lot of corn,
they weren't getting
enough tryptophan,
which means they weren't
getting enough niacin.
And there were a large
number of people in the South
during the depression
that had pellagra.
Pellagra is the vitamin
B3 deficiency disease.
The four Ds-- dermatitis,
diarrhea, dementia, and death.
A very serious illness.
There is no drug in the world
that will cure pellagra,
only vitamin B3 and niacin.
Now think about that.
Deficiency in B3
eventually will kill you,
but first it will cause
dermatitis and diarrhea.
Now you might miss that.
That could be caused
by a lot of things.
And those are not real
serious illnesses.
But dementia, now that's
another one entirely.
So what happened was as soon
as food fortification was
introduced and niacin
was put into foods,
there was much less
pellagra in the south.
Just from a tiny little bit of
niacin, the amount of pellagra
plummeted in just a few years.
Dr. Abram Hoffer-- the
psychiatrist, medical doctor,
nutrition PhD, and researcher--
thought that maybe the people
that still had dementia simply
hadn't gotten a high
enough dose of niacin,
that their personal
need was higher.
And they didn't
have a deficiency.
They had a dependency.
So he started giving
them thousands
of milligrams of niacin a day.
And these people with
dementia or psychosis
or schizophrenia, 90%
of them were carried.
So when we look at
depression, I think
the first thing we should do
is look at nutrient deficiency.
Why don't we take
animals and see
how we can make them depressed?
Now I'm a big believer
in animal rights,
but I will sacrifice an
animal or 2 or 10 or 100
if it will save your
grandmother's life.
I'm willing to do that.
I have that viewpoint.
And yet, I think that
animal research by and large
should be avoided.
I don't mean to sound like
I'm confusing the point there,
but I think that we can do
animal research compassionately
in the same way we can
milk cows compassionately.
It's just an opinion.
So let's say we take monkeys.
We take two groups of monkeys.
And we make one group
nutrient deficient,
and we give the other
group lots of vitamins.
We will notice that the group
that's nutrient deficient
is going to have poor behavior.
They're going to be depressed.
They're going to
become demented.
They're not going to
behave in a normal way.
This is true with cats,
and it's already been done.
Francis M. Pottenger
Junior, a physician,
tracked several
generations of cats.
I think five or more
He had them in two groups.
One group got raw food,
and the other group
got all cooked food.
The raw food group did fine.
The cooked food group
developed all the diseases
that people get--
allergies, asthma, arthritis,
cancer, heart disease,
depression, and dementia.
Well, Pottenger thought
that was pretty interesting.
But what was really
interesting was
when he took the
group that was sick
and gave them the fresh
food, they all got better.
So I think the solution
is just that simple.
I think we're having trouble
seeing the trees because
of the forest.
We're having a difficult time
accepting a simple therapy.
Here's what you can do.
If someone's depressed,
the first thing they can do
is know that it's
OK to be depressed.
If you're malnourished,
you should be depressed.
So don't do that anymore.
Go and eat good food.
And I defy anyone who is
depressed to feel depressed
if they have a couple of nice
big, fresh vegetable salads
and lots and lots of fresh
fruit and nuts and seeds
and good food chewed well--
fresh, organic, and wholesome.
I defy anybody to
try that for a month
and tell me that
they feel depressed.
That's the first thing.
The second thing is
niacin, vitamin B3 niacin.
If you're depressed and
you want to feel better
in less than 15 minutes,
take 250 to 500 milligrams
of pure niacin.
That will cause a flush.
You'll look like
you have a sunburn,
or you'll feel like
you're having a hot flash,
and you will not feel
depressed if you do that.
That's a nice temporary
way of testing this theory
about vitamin B3.
If a person is down and
miserable and depressed
and they take high
doses of niacin,
they will notice an
immediate improvement.
I worked with a lady once
who was suicidally depressed.
She lived at home
with her family.
She was in her 50s.
And she spent all day sitting
in a corner, face to the corner.
She wouldn't talk to anyone.
She wouldn't eat with anyone.
She was totally uncommunicative.
She was under the care
of a psychiatrist,
of course, as she should be.
And the psychiatrist had her
on a variety of medications,
which you would expect.
The family was wondering
about nutrition.
And I mentioned to them about
Dr. Hoffer's work with niacin.
And they wondered how
much she needed to take.
This person was
very seriously ill.
And I mentioned that
Dr. Hoffer normally
gave about 3,000
milligrams a day of niacin,
but some people need a lot more,
especially very sick people,
and they should give her as much
as it takes to make her better.
Well, they figured
they could do that.
So at 11,500 milligrams
of niacin a day,
she was sitting at the
table and talking to them
like nothing had happened.
Now if you or I took 11,5000
milligrams of niacin,
we would be glowing beet red.
We would have such an
intense niacin flush
and probably we would have
other symptoms too-- itching,
maybe even nausea.
But for her, because she
had a vitamin dependency,
that was the amount for
her which made her better--
11,500 milligrams
of niacin a day.
So they went to
the psychiatrist,
showed the psychiatrist
this recovered person,
and the psychiatrist
said, well, I
don't think you should
take all that niacin.
It might be harmful.
So they stopped
giving her the niacin,
and she was back in the corner.
Safety with niacin?
There is not one death from
niacin per year on average.
There have been one
or two attributed
over the last 15 or 20
years, but there's not even
one death per year from niacin.
And how many people
that are suicidally
depressed actually go
and end their lives?
Tremendous tragedy.
So if niacin can help
that lady's depression,
think what it can do for yours.
[LAUGHS] So there's two
things you could do.
Now the third thing is
high doses of vitamin C,
because vitamin C in
high doses actually
helps you make certain chemicals
which improve your mood.
And the other thing
is eat lots of foods
that contain tryptophan--
cashews, the dark meat
of chicken and turkey.
Nuts in general are
high in tryptophan.
And that tends to improve
mood tremendously.
In fact, if you look
at cashews, they
have so much tryptophan in them
that two handfuls of cashews
give you the therapeutic
equivalent of a prescription
dose of Prozac.
There's a lot of
tryptophan in cashew nuts.
Now everyone then says,
oh, but two cash--
two handfuls of cashews,
isn't that fattening?
And my point is, do you care?
Do you want to get
over the depression?
And not only that, if you
eat two handfuls of cashews,
you think you're
going to be hungry?
You think you're going
to want anything else?
So there is a case and point
where cashews, also beans--
dairy products
contain tryptophan--
these are antidepressant foods.
Armed with this
knowledge-- vitamin
C, fresh, raw organic food and
plenty of it, cashews, niacin.
I think since all of them
work to eliminate depression,
I would say the
cause of depression
is failure to take them.
You see, the big
danger of vitamins
is not taking too many.
It's taking too few.
The public has been
warned off the very thing
that they should
be doing more of.
The medical profession
has it wrong.
Even the medical schools
that offer nutrition
do not offer mega
dose nutrition.
Even the medical
schools that have
courses in alternative medicine
are not really focusing on it.
I believe they're
just giving it a nod.
The answer is for
every person to realize
that if you want
something done right,
you have to do it yourself.
You have to read,
you have to dig,
you have to want to
have this information,
and, of course, I
might add you have
to be willing to actually
take the vitamins
and actually juice
the vegetables.
You have to walk the walk.
Of course, it's worth it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]